I’ve had a lot of discussions on my podcast
where we haggle out our timelines to AGI.
Some guests think it’s 20
years away. Others 2 years.
Here’s where my thoughts lie as of July 2025.
Sometimes people say that even if all AI
progress totally stopped, the systems of
today would still be far more economically
transformative than the internet. I disagree.
I think the LLMs of today are magical.
But the reason that the Fortune 500 aren’t using
them to totally transform their workflows isn’t
because the management there is too stodgy.
Rather, I think it’s genuinely hard to get
normal humanlike labor out of these LLMs.
And this has to do with some fundamental
capabilities these models lack.
I like to think I’m "AI forward"
here at the Dwarkesh Podcast.
I’ve probably spent over a hundred
hours trying to build these little LLM
tools for my post production setup.
And the experience of trying to get them
to be useful has extended my timelines.
I’ll try to get an LLMs to rewrite autogenerated
transcripts for me, to optimize for readability
in the way a human would.
Or I’ll try to get them to
identify clips from a transcript that I feed in.
Sometimes I’ll try to get them to co-write an
essay with me, passage by passage.
These are simple, self contained,
short horizon, language in, language out tasks—the
kinds of assignments that should be dead center
in the LLMs’ repertoire. And they're 5/10 at
them. Don’t get me wrong, that is impressive.
But the fundamental problem is that LLMs don’t
get better over time the way a human would.
This lack of continual learning
is a huge huge bottleneck.
The LLM baseline at many tasks might
be higher than the average human's.
But there’s no way to give
a model high level feedback.
You’re stuck with the abilities
you get out of the box.
You can keep messing around with the system
prompt, but in practice this just doesn’t produce
anything even close to the kind of learning and
improvement that human employees experience.
The reason humans are so useful
is not mainly their raw intellect.
It’s their ability to build up context,
interrogate their own failures,
and pick up small improvements and
efficiencies as they practice a task.
How would you teach a kid to play the saxophone?
You'd have them try to blow into one, and then
they'd see how it sounds, and they'd adjust.
Now imagine if this was the way you'd have to
teach saxophone instead: A
student takes one attempt.
And the moment they make a mistake, you
send them away and you write detailed
instructions about what went wrong.
And you call the next student in.
And the next student reads your notes
and tries to play Charlie Parker cold.
And when they fail, you refine your instructions
and you invite the next student. This just
wouldn’t work. No matter how well honed your
prompt is, no kid is just going to learn how
to play saxophone from reading your instructions.
But this is the only modality we have to ‘teach’
LLMs anything. Yes, there’s RL fine tuning.
But it’s not a deliberate, adaptive process
in the way that human learning is.
My editors have gotten extremely good.
And they wouldn’t have gotten that way if
we had to build bespoke RL environments for
different subtasks involved in their work.
They’ve just noticed a lot of small things
themselves and thought hard about
what resonates with the audience,
what kind of content I like, and how they
can improve their day to day workflows.
Now, it’s possible to imagine ways in
which a smarter model could build a
dedicated RL loop for itself which just
feels super organic from the outside.
I give some high level feedback, and the
model comes up with a bunch of verifiable
practice problems to RL on—maybe even a whole
environment in which it gets to rehearse the
skills that it thinks it's lacking.
But this just sounds really hard.
And I don’t know how well these
techniques will generalize to
different kinds of tasks and feedback.
Eventually the models will be able to learn
on the job in this organic way that humans can.
But it’s just hard for me to see how that could
happen within the next few years, given
there’s no immediately obvious way in
which to slot in continuous learning into
the kinds of models that these LLMs are.
LLMs actually do get kinda smart and
useful in the middle of a session.
For example, sometimes I’ll
co-write an essay with an LLM.
I’ll give it an outline, and I’ll ask it
to draft the essay passage by passage.
And all its suggestions up till
paragraph four will just be bad.
I'll just rewrite every single paragraph from
scratch and tell it, "Look, your shit sucked.
This is what I wrote instead."
And at this point, it will actually start
giving good suggestions for the next paragraph.
But this whole subtle understanding of my
preferences and style will just
be lost by the end of the session.
Maybe there is an easy solution to this that
looks like a long rolling context window, like
Claude Code already has, which just compacts the
session memory into a summary every 30 minutes.
I just think that titrating all this rich
tacit experience into a text summary will
be brittle in domains outside of software
engineering, which is very text-based,
in which you already have this external scaffold
of memory that is stored in the codebase itself.
Again, think about what it would be like to
teach a kid to play the saxophone just from text.
Even Claude Code will often reverse a hard-earned
optimization that we engineered together before I
hit /compact —because the explanation for why
it was made didn’t make it into the summary.
This is why I disagree with something that
Anthropic researchers Sholto Douglas and
Trenton Bricken said on my podcast.
And this quote is from Trenton:
"Even if AI progress totally stalls
(and you think that the models are
really spiky, and they don't have general
intelligence), it's so economically valuable,
and sufficiently easy to collect data on all
of these different white collar job tasks,
such that to Sholto's point we should expect to
see them automated within the next five years."
If AI progress totally stops today, I think less
than 25% of white collar employment goes away.
Sure, many tasks will get automated.
Claude 4 Opus can technically rewrite
autogenerated transcripts for me.
But since it’s not possible for me
to have it improve over time and learn my
preferences, I still hire a human for this.
So even if we get more data, without progress
in continual learning, I think that we will be
in a substantially similar position with
all other kinds of white collar work.
Yes, technically AIs will be able to do
a lot of subtasks somewhat satisfactorily,
but their inability to build up context
will make it impossible to have them operate
as actual employees at your firm.
While this makes me bearish about
transformative AI in the next few years, it makes
me especially bullish on AI over the next decades.
When we do solve continual learning, we’ll see a
huge discontinuity in the value of these models.
Even if there isn’t a software only
singularity, where these models rapidly
build smarter and smarter successor systems,
we might still get something that looks like
a broadly deployed intelligence explosion.
AIs will be getting broadly deployed through the
economy, and doing different jobs and learning
while doing them in the way that humans can.
However, unlike humans, these
models can amalgamate their
learnings across all their copies.
So one AI is basically learning
how to do every single job in the economy.
An AI that is capable of this kind of online
learning might rapidly become a superintelligence
even if there's no further algorithmic progress.
However, I’m not expecting to watch some
OpenAI livestream where they announce that
continual learning has been totally solved.
Because labs are incentivized to release any
innovations quickly, we’ll see a broken early
version of continual learning (or test time
training, or whatever you want to call it) before
we see something which truly learns like a human.
I expect to get lots of heads up before
this big bottleneck is totally solved.
When I interviewed Anthropic researchers
Sholto Douglas and Trenton Bricken on my
podcast, they said that they expect reliable
computer use agents by the end of next year.
We already have computer use agents right
now, but they’re pretty bad. They’re imagining
something quite different. Their forecast is
that by the end of next year, you should be
able to tell an AI, "Go do my taxes."
And it'ill go through all your email,
your Amazon orders, and Slack messages, and
it will email back and forth with every single
person you need to get invoices from, it'll
compile all your receipts, decide what things
are actually are business expenses, and it will
ask for your approval on all the edge cases,
and then will just submit Form 1040 to the IRS.
I’m skeptical. I’m not an AI researcher, so far be
it for me to contradict them on technical details.
But given what little I know, here’s why I’d bet
against this forecast:
One.
As horizon lengths increase,
rollouts have to become longer.
The AI needs to do two hours worth of
agentic computer use tasks before we
can even see if it did it right.
Not to mention that computer use
requires processing images and video,
which is already more compute intensive,
even if you don’t factor in the longer rollouts.
This seems like it should slow down progress.
Two. We don’t have a large pretraining
corpus of multimodal computer use data.
I like this quote from Mechanize’s post
on automating software engineering:
"For the past decade of scaling, we’ve been
spoiled by the enormous amount of internet
data that was freely available for us to use.
This was enough to crack natural language
processing, but not for getting models
to become reliable, competent agents.
Imagine trying to train GPT-4 on all
the text data available in 1980—the
data would have been nowhere near enough,
even if you had the necessary compute."
Again, I’m not at the labs.
Maybe text only training already gives you a
great prior over how different UIs work, and what
the relationship is between different components.
Maybe RL fine tuning is so sample efficient
that you don’t need that much data.
But I haven’t seen any public evidence which
makes me think that these models have suddenly
gotten less data hungry, especially in domains
where they’re substantially less practiced.
Alternatively, maybe these models are such
good front end coders that they can just
generate millions of toy UIs for themselves
to practice on. But, three. Even algorithmic
innovations which seem quite simple in
retrospect took a long time to iron out.
The RL procedure which DeepSeek explained in
their R1 paper seems simple at a high level.
And yet it took 2 years from the development
and launch of GPT-4 to the release of o1.
Now of course I know that it's insanely and
hilariously arrogant to say that R1/o1 were easy—a
ton of engineering, debugging, and pruning of
alternative ideas was required to arrive at
this solution. But that’s precisely my point!
Seeing how long it took to implement the idea
of ‘We should train a model to solve verifiable
math and coding problems,’ makes me think that
we’re underestimating the difficulty of solving
the much gnarlier problem of computer use, where
you’re operating in a totally different modality
with much less data. Okay, enough cold water. I’m
not going to be like one of those spoiled children
on Hackernews who could be handed a golden-egg
laying goose and would still spend all their
time complaining about how loud its quacks are.
Have you read the reasoning traces from o3 or
Gemini 2.5? It’s actually reasoning! It’s breaking
down a problem, thinking through what the user
wants, reacting to its own internal monologue,
and correcting itself when it notices that
it's pursuing an unproductive direction.
How are we just like, "Oh yeah of course a
machine is gonna go think a bunch, come up
with a bunch of ideas, and come back to me with
a smart answer. That’s just what machines do."
Part of the reason some people are too
pessimistic is that they haven’t played
around with the smartest models in
domains where they’re the most competent.
Giving Claude Code a vague spec and just
sitting around for 10 minutes while it
zero shots a working application is a wild
experience. How did it do that? You can talk
about circuits and the training distribution
and RL or whatever, but the most proximal,
concise, and accurate explanation is simply that
it’s powered by a baby general intelligence.
At this point, part of you has to
be thinking, "It’s actually working.
We’re making machines that are intelligent."
My probability distributions are super wide.
And I want to emphasize that I do
believe in probability distributions.
Which means that work to prepare for a
misaligned 2028 ASI still makes a ton of sense.
I think this is a totally plausible outcome.
But here are the timelines at which
I’d take a 50/50 bet.
An AI that can do taxes
end-to-end for my small business as well as
a competent general manager could in a week:
including chasing down all the receipts on
different websites, finding the missing pieces,
emailing back and forth with anyone who we need
to hassle for invoices, filling out the form,
and sending it to the IRS. This I'd say 2028. I
think we’re in the GPT 2 era for computer use.
But we have no pretraining corpus, and the
models are optimizing for a much sparser
reward over a much longer time horizon using
action primitives they’re unfamiliar with.
That being said, the base model is
already decently smart and might have
a good prior over computer use tasks,
plus there’s a lot more compute and AI
researchers in the world, so it might even out.
Preparing taxes for a small business feels like
for computer use what GPT 4 was for language.
It took 4 years to get from GPT 2 to GPT 4.
Just to clarify, I am not saying that
we won’t have really cool computer use
demos in 2026 and 2027.
GPT-3 was super cool,
but it was not that practically useful.
I’m saying that these models won’t be capable
of end-to-end handling a week long and quite
involved project which involves computer use.
Ok, and as for the forecast of when AI
will be able to learn on the job as easily,
organically, seamlessly, and quickly
as humans, for any white collar work.
For example, if I hired an AI video editor, after
six months it would have as much actionable,
deep understanding of my preferences,
our channel, what works for the audience,
as well as a human would.
I'd say this would come in 2032.
While I don’t see an obvious way to
slot in continuous online learning
into the kinds of models these LLMs
are, 7 years is a really long time!
GPT 1 had just come out this time 7 years ago.
It doesn’t seem implausible to me that over the
next 7 years, we’ll find some way to get
these models to actually learn on the job.
At this point you might be reacting,
"Wait you made this huge fuss about
continual learning being such a huge handicap.
But then your prediction is that we’re 7 years
away from what, at a minimum, looks like a broadly
deployed intelligence explosion." And yeah, you’re
right. I am forecasting a pretty wild world within
a relatively short amount of time. AGI timelines
are very lognormal. It's either this decade or
bust. (Not really, it's more like lower marginal
probability per year—but that’s less catchy).
AI progress over the last decade has
been driven by scaling training
compute on the frontier systems.
It's been over 4x a year.
This cannot continue beyond this decade,
whether you look at chips, power, or even the
raw fraction of GDP that is used on training.
After 2030, AI progress has to mostly
come from algorithmic progress.
But even there all the low
hanging fruit will be plucked,
at least under the deep learning paradigm.
So the yearly probability of AGI collapses.
This means that if we end up on the longer side of
my 50/50 bets, we might be looking at a relatively
normal world up till the 2030s or even the 2040s.
But in all the other worlds, even if we stay sober
about the current limitations of AI, we
have to expect some truly crazy outcomes.
This was originally a blog post that I
published on my website at dwarkesh.com.
And it was obviously inspired by the discussion
I had with Sholto and Trenton on my podcast,
where I ended up disagreeing with them about
timelines but it took me a few weeks of thinking
afterwards, sorting out exactly where I
disagree and why I had longer timelines.
And I do this for other episodes as well.
I wrote up some thoughts I had about the many
thousands of pages that Stephen Kotkin has written
about Stalin, obviously which we were not able to
exhaustively cover in that one 2-hour interview.
So anyways, if you want to see these additional
artifacts and writing that I produce as a result
of this podcast and in preparation for episodes,
you should subscribe to my blog and newsletter.
You can do that at dwarkesh.com.
Otherwise I will also see you next week
for a full episode with a real guest.